We live in very stressful times.
First Peter 5.8 indicates that Satan the Devil is bitterly angry and walks about like a
roaring lion.
Throughout the Bible, we learn that God-fearing worshipers of Jehovah in the past face circumstances
that produce anxiety.
For example at Psalm 132, King David asks, How long will I have anxious concern with grief
in my heart each day?
Please find with me Luke 22, verses 42 through 44.
Even Jesus, a perfect man, experienced the agony of intense anxiety on the night of
his betrayal.
Here is what he prayed in Luke 22, 42.
Father, if you want to remove this cup from me, nevertheless let not my will, but yours
take place.
He knew what he was in for.
Well, what happened?
Verse 43.
Then an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
An angel was dispatched to encourage Jesus.
Did that instantly erase his anxious concerns?
No.
Let's read verse 44.
But he was in such agony that he kept praying more earnestly and his sweat became as
drops of blood falling to the ground.
Have you ever been that anxious about anything?
Your sweat becoming drops of blood probably not.
But you did not have the salvation of the world of mankind on your shoulders.
The point is that all of Jehovah's servants in these last days will have bouts of anxiety.
For many around the world it might be the high cost of food, clothing and shelter.
In the wake of the pandemic this anxiety likely is being experienced by more of our brothers
than would normally be the case.
Some of you live in neighborhoods with a high crime rate and violence all around.
Others face temptations from workmaids or schoolmaids to be dishonest or immoral.
In their family issues, health issues, emotional issues, the deaths of loved ones, all of these
can be causes for anxiety.
Still others of our brothers and sisters face mistreatment and abuse from family members,
governmental oppression, and from false religious elements that foment hate and prejudice.
The title of this talk is, strive for calm when facing anxious times.
Is calm even possible?
Jehovah came to the assistance of his servants in the past.
Today he makes it possible for us to gain a measure of calm when facing distress or anxiety.
Locate 1 Peter 5, 6 and 7, please.
Verse 7 describes an action we can take with our anxiety.
Let's read verses 6 and 7.
Humble yourselves, therefore under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt you in
due time, while you throw all your anxiety on him, because he cares for you.
Did you notice the time element in verse 6?
It is said that Jehovah will exalt you in due time, so not necessarily immediately.
If you're facing anxious moments, what do you do in the meantime?
It is the action that's described in verse 7, throw all your anxiety on Jehovah.
If we throw something, what are we left holding in our hand?
Nothing.
We don't keep the anxiety bottled up inside ourself.
We throw all of it on our God.
You might be thinking, my anxiety is so heavy and burdensome, I can't even pick it up,
let alone throw it anywhere.
Let's look at a related scripture in the book of Psalms, Psalm 37.5.
Instead of throw, it uses the word commit, verse 5.
Commit your way to Jehovah, rely on him and he will act in your behalf.
It said commit your way.
The footnote says this could be translated, roll your way up on Jehovah.
So if your anxiety seems too heavy to throw on Jehovah, give it a push, try rolling it
on him.
How do we throw commit or roll our anxious thoughts on Jehovah?
Let's open our Bibles to Philippians 4, verses 6 and 7.
Do not be anxious over anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication, along with thanksgiving,
let your petitions be made known to God, and the peace of God that surpasses all understanding
will guard your hearts and your mental powers by means of Christ Jesus.
We throw our role or anxiety on Jehovah by means of fervent prayer.
Pour your heart out to God.
You can tell Jehovah anything, even if it is embarrassing to you.
Remember, Jehovah is not going to tell anyone about it.
Go our role it on him.
And what did verse 7 say would be the result of such prayers?
It said the peace of God.
He has a calm tranquility.
Comes over us when we fully trust Jehovah's power to sustain us.
How else can our heart calm down?
Pour your anxiety with trusted friends in the congregation, including an elder you
feel comfortable with.
Hebrews 10-25 says, When we meet together, we receive encouragement.
Or in these uncertain times, instead of meeting together, it might be letters, emails,
or texts from your concern to brothers and sisters will have a similar effect.
What else can have a calming effect on us, reading applicable portions of God's word and
meditating on them?
For example, Isaiah 41, Is this describing walking hand in hand with God, or is this describing
Jehovah reaching into your life and saving you from calamity and anxiety?
Let's compare two verses in Isaiah 41.
Notice his promise in verse 10, Do not be afraid, for I am with you.
Do not be anxious, for I am your God.
I will fortify you, yes I will help you, I will really hold on to you with my right hand
of righteousness.
Did you notice Jehovah tells you not to be afraid or anxious?
Why?
Because he will hold on to you with his right hand.
In verse 11 and 12, it describes some tragic circumstances we might face in life.
Now verse 13, For I, Jehovah, your God, am grasping your right hand, the one saying to
you, Do not be afraid, I will help you.
Did you see the point?
This is not describing a stroll with God.
This is not describing walking hand in hand with God.
This is a rescue mission by God.
If it was a casual stroll with God, your left hand would be in his right hand.
But the two verses say that Jehovah grasps your right hand and with his right hand.
It is as if Jehovah is facing you.
He sees your dire plight.
He reaches out with his right hand and grasp your right hand and pulls you up out to safety.
Specific Bible verses, calm us down and reassure us.
The three aspects we've considered, one prayer, two encouragement from our brothers and
three, meditating on the scriptures, were mentioned by four brothers in Russia who have
been convicted to prison senses.
Please watch the following video.
I was detained at the airport at 4 in the morning, right at the checking desk an FSB officer
came up to us and said that investigative measures were being taken against us.
There was a knock at the door and I understood that they had come for me.
It all happened very quickly.
First they detained us, then they handcuffed us, then they searched us.
A jeep with tinted windows blocked the road, then with shouts of, stay where you are.
They twisted my arms and threw me onto the hood of my automobile.
The next day, a court imposed preventive measures on me and I was taken to the pretrial detention
facility in Habarovsk.
I was taken to a dark room in the prison and shot in, then I got on my knees and prayed
to Jehovah telling him that I wanted to stand firm in the face of the trials and remain
faithful to him.
When I was in the detention cell, every evening I prayed for my friends, my wife, my children,
everyone I know and tried to think about their circumstances and pray specifically.
I started praying to Jehovah for help with tears because things were getting very difficult
for me.
But then things started changing, which as I understood, Jehovah had already arranged
at the start of that day.
I prayed for boldness and to be courageous, calm and kind and Jehovah gave me the strength
for that.
I felt calm when I talked with them and I didn't feel afraid of consequences or anything.
I prayed to Jehovah and asked him to show me that he was close by, that he was doing something
and that the whole situation was under his control.
And the first letter I received that morning was about the sun.
Interestingly, I had read a lot of articles about the sun and understood that Jehovah's
immense strength and power are manifested in it.
But that day I especially felt it.
The first letters that I received were about God's qualities and about the qualities that
I needed to display in that specific situation.
They weren't just encouraging to me.
They were also fine witnesses to the administration.
The guards who were amazed, they asked Vanya, who is writing to you from Krasnodar, I've
got friends there and then about other places.
They wrote to me from friends from America.
The letters enabled them to see that the situation is under the control of a huge number of
people who know about me, about my circumstances.
The actions I've been carefully observed by many people.
Talks, topics for talks, items for meetings, these are things I took from the letters that
I received each day.
From one letter I would take, for example, material for a 10 minute talk and from another I could
make a public talk.
This I was able to collect quotes from various letters.
I eventually had an entire library.
I was able to compare and collect information and then conduct high quality, excellent personal
study that helped me keep in step with the organization at that time.
A boy drew a picture and sent it to me.
He wrote, if you remain faithful, you will be in the new world.
An elderly sister began to let her with these warm words.
Greetings, my son.
She shared her feelings with me.
He later came at one of the most difficult times for me.
I felt that Jehovah comforts us in a special way through letters.
I met the following schedule.
I got up early in the morning at 5'30, while everyone else in the cell was snoozing and
all was quiet, I was able to read the Bible.
I would think a great deal about a particular verse.
The more I reflected on it, the more I saw how beautiful it was.
By the end of the day the verse would have become stunningly beautiful and unique to me.
Then I understood that a good heart is warmed, not by the amount that you take in, but by
the amount you can retain in your heart.
When you read the Bible in a pre-trial detention cell, it takes on a new meaning.
When I read a book of Acts, the things that happened to Paul became especially understandable,
strengthened me, and showed me that I could get through these times just as he did.
Mordecai's experience from the Bible went to my heart.
After Heyman had made an agreement with the king to destroy the Israelites, he went
out and met Mordecai.
And it says that Mordecai did not rise and did not tremble.
The main point is that now, just as then, as with Mordecai, we don't tremble.
When applying the three elements of prayer, encouragement from our brothers, and meditating
on God's word, what did that produce?
It helped the brothers to be calm and trust in Jehovah.
Let's look at the final scripture for this talk.
Please find Isaiah, chapter 30, verse 15.
What a beautiful verse for us to keep in mind when facing these anxious times.
Unfortunately, the Israelites were not willing to listen to this profound directive from
Jehovah.
Please read it with me, Isaiah 30, 15.
For this is what the sovereign Lord, Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel says,
By returning to me and resting, you will be saved.
Your strength will be in keeping calm and showing trust, but you were unwilling.
What about us?
Will we be willing or unwilling?
As we face these anxious times and even more turbulent times ahead, will we take to
the heart Jehovah's admonition?
Did you notice where your strengths of character and fortitude will come from?
It is by keeping calm and showing trust.
And that, brothers and sisters, is our twenty-twenty-one year text.
Your strength will be in keeping calm and showing trust, Isaiah 30, 15.
We will face anxious times ahead.
By means of prayer, encouragement from each other, and leaning on God's insightful word,
what can we experience during these last days?
We can keep a sense of calm and fully trust in the sovereign of the universe.
Our great God, Jehovah.